---
layout: post
title: "Number Words and Number Symbols: A Cultural History of Numbers"
link: http://www.amazon.com/Number-Words-Symbols-Cultural-History/dp/0486270963
tags: Mathematics
category: books
---

I had the russian edition. The book consists of several sections and begins
with author's explanation about how numbers had possibly emerged in the
languages of different nations. They appeared not at once, but one after another
anf often not sequencially but when they were needed. That's why round numbers
(tens, hundreds) emerged earlier then their lower non round neighbours and the
names of round numbers affected the names of their neighbours too. In some
cases people even didn't need the actual names for the numbers and used signs
or special names connected with the field they were used at. Right now we all
count in the decimal system, but much earlier people have used names based on
five or on twenty. Even the definition of the number was evolving. Not only
zero wasn't treated as a number, one was also not treated by europeans as a
number for a long time.

There are myriads of different facts represented in the book and all they are
accompanied with lots of photos and cross references. The density of them sometimes
is so high, that it was a bit hard to get through all of them while reading.
Also, some examples or descriptions of the calculation techniques and algorythms
are not well defined and may contain errors (may be it's only true for russian
edition) that it takes significant time to get it right. For example to really
understand how calculations were done by Sumer I just took anothe book ("History
of Mathematics" by A. Yushkevich).

The big advantage of this book is that during exmplanations author constantly
shows connections with current languages and shows how different words or
terms were born like bankrupt, bureau, the names and symbols of currencies etc.

It's very interesting to read section devoted to calculations and numbers usage
in Middle Ages. We are so used to arabic numbers (that are actually form India)
that it's hard to believe that in the middle ages most of european countries
used roman numbers for writing and special calculation table for actual calculations,
because roman letters do not provide any machanics to use them in the calculations
directly. These tables and their analogs were wide spread everywhere from Japan
to Western Europe and were used even in the twentieth century.

It may also be a revelation that some nations used non-decimal numbering systems
for the calculations, based on twenty or sixty, and it affected the way
the calculations were done by them. The consequence for us now is that
we have 60 seconds in a minute now.

The last cool thing that I want to mention is how calculations were made when the
paper was expensive and not widespread. All sort of counting rods were used in
the Europe and one type of them was called Split tally sticks and was used by
British exchecquer until 1826. It was used for tax collection or debt recording.
Every stick with the number of tax to be paid or debt to be returned was split
into to part and by joining them again one could verify that the payment is
correct and should be done.

The book has a lot of useful information and it is a drastic difference comparing
with most of modern popular science books that usually have the same volume but
contain just few facts and just repeat them through the pages again and again
in different variations.

I highly recommend this book for all those who are interested to know more about
how we ended up with all the numbers and the things around them that we have now.
The only advice I can give is not to dig very deep into the sections connected
with the representation of numbers in different languages. This section has so many
comparisons and crossreferences between different language that it really doesn't
give a lot to the general idea but it really takes a lot of time to understand
the whole thing.

As a conclusion I want to say that I was surprised to find very little information
about the author in the internet, and there is actually rather small number of
references to this book, at the same time it's quite old. All this raises some
suspictions, that this book is not a classic one on the subject, so probably
it may differ from "official" points of view and it may be worth to double check
any information of any importance in different sources before actually using it
anywhere seriously.