---
layout: post
title: "Free data"
keywords: "open access, free data, open-source"
category: blog
---

Data rules the world, right? Vast amount of information can be used not only to
extracts some insights from it, it can be a weapon or a timebomb depending on
the circumstances. Bad news for ordinary people is that they rarely have access
or own information, they mostly ask for it. What if one refuses to answer?

Some years ago it was possible to buy it at least, but in the age of ubiquitous
web services everything lives somewhere else and we have no way to control it.
Services that we use everyday belong to very few major players, and it's hard
to imagine a scale of the disaster if google goes offline or is forced to stop
providing services to the users of the country that doesn't fit to one's
understanding of real democracy.

A lot of web sites heavily rely on crowd sourced data, but the only way users
can access it is the way provided by this services. Is it fare?

I'd say not. I firmly believe that future innovations heavily rely on free
access to different kind of information.

If you remember there was a period in mid 2000s, so called Web 2.0 where the
trend was to create open APIs and give away as much information as possible to
enable interconnection of the web. After some time this trend turned into
decline, but we really need to get it back.

Every service that takes data from users should make it possible to get it
back.  If the data is anonymous then it should be possible to get it all. Just
have a look on the amount of applications that use wikipedia data as a source.
Another example is OpenStreetMap project.

Knowledge and Navigation is two pieces, communication is the third one. We
really nead open dictionary and translation engine the will prevent dependency
on single player and allow everyone to benefit.

Two more field that come into mind are history and repairs. Talking about the
latter, how many times anyone got into situation the the devices he or she had
had only one detail broken and there was no way to fix it because it was no
longer supported/produced?  It shouldn't be that way, especially with emerging
3d-printing technologies. We need and open service that will contain models for
parts of the devices that could be printed.  I can imagine the future where
every such repair is just a matter of downloading proper model and sending it
to a printer.

And at last, what can we do with the history? The problem with it is that due to
amount of information and globalization it's way to easy to hide important changes
behind silly news. How nice it would be to have an open database that will accumulate
information about all events happening, so that it will be possible to make
an analysis and separate real news from the garbage and see real connections between
events that would otherwise go unnoticed.



